Documentation for wan fed via mgw on k8s (#7882)
hashicorp/consul: website/pages/docs/k8s/installation/multi-cluster/overview.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Multi-Cluster Federation Overview
sidebar_title: Overview
description: >-
  Installing on multiple Kubernetes clusters.
---

# Multi-Cluster Federation Overview

In Consul, federation is the act of joining two or more Consul datacenters.
When datacenters are joined, Consul servers in each datacenter can communicate
with one another. This enables the following features:

- Services on all clusters can make calls to each other through Consul Service Mesh.

> - [Intentions](/docs/connect/intentions) can be used to enforce cross-cluster rules about which services can communicate.

Reviewer: This might be a little misleading - Intentions can't actually enforce which DCs are allowed to talk currently which is what this seems to imply to my reading.

Perhaps:
```suggestion
- [Intentions](/docs/connect/intentions) can be used to enforce rules about which services can communicate across all clusters.
```

- [L7 Routing Rules](/docs/connect/l7-traffic-management) can enable multi-cluster failover
  and traffic splitting.
- The Consul UI has a drop-down menu that lets you navigate between datacenters.

## Traditional WAN Federation vs. WAN Federation Via Mesh Gateways

Consul provides two mechanisms for WAN (Wide Area Network) federation:

1. Traditional WAN Federation
1. WAN Federation Via Mesh Gateways (newly available in Consul 1.8.0)

### Traditional WAN Federation

With traditional WAN federation, all Consul servers must be exposed on the wide area

> network. In the Kubernetes context this is often unachievable. It would require that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
network. In the Kubernetes context this is often difficult to setup. It would require that
```

each Consul server pod is running on a Kubernetes node with an IP address that is routable from
all other Kubernetes clusters. Often Kubernetes clusters are deployed into private

> subnets that other clusters cannot .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subnets that other clusters cannot route to without additional network devices and configuration.
```

![WAN Federation Via Mesh Gateway](/img/mesh-gateway-wan-federation.png 'WAN Federation Via Mesh Gateway')

## Network Requirements

Clusters/datacenters can be federated even if they have overlapping pod IP spaces or if they're
on different cloud providers or platforms. Kubernetes clusters can even be
federated with Consul datacenters running on virtual machines (and vice versa).
Because the communication between clusters is end-to-end encrypted, mesh gateways
can even be exposed on the public internet.

The only requirement is that the mesh gateways for each cluster can route to
one another. For example, if using a load balancer service in front of each cluster's
mesh gateway, the load balancer IP must be routable from the other mesh gateway pods.

If using a public load balancer, this is guaranteed. If using a private load balancer
then you'll need to make sure that its IP is routable from your other clusters.

## Next Steps

Now that you have an overview of federation, proceed to either the
[Federation Between Kubernetes Clusters](/docs/k8s/installation/multi-cluster/kubernetes)
or [Federation Between VMs and Kubernetes](/docs/k8s/installation/multi-cluster/vms-and-kubernetes)

> pages depending on your use case.

Reviewer: This page is fantastic!
